Draw one

How many cantilevers can you see from the west side? $:JJ

ACTIVITY:

BULK PLANT -MATOVICH'S CONOCO BULK PLANT
305 N. Railroad Street
The Hardin Oil Company is a wood frame construction built in 1922 by
Mutual Oil Company. On the north side is a small shed, an office addition to the
east, and on the west is a loading dock. Further west are five cylinder bulk oil
tanks. The bulk plant was established as a wholesale outlet for oils, grease,
gasoline, and kerosene. Other than signage, the building has been altered very
little and is typical of a business established along the tracks in a railroad town.

ACTIVITY:
Tanks #1 and #2 are 15 feet high and 119 inches around and hold 8,900 gallons.
Tanks #3 and #4 are 24 feet high and 132 inches around and hold 17,000 gallons.

Use the formula below to figure out how many gallons per cubic feet
are in this tank.
(3.14) X
R X R X H(height)
tlJJ/10,OOO
{l::n
,..,
, = gallons
per cubic feet

=

".

CAMPBELL

FARMING CORPORATION
Railroad Street

The sheds framed and covered with corrugated iron siding were built in
1913 on Railroad Street for meal storage of the Alfalfa Mill. The mill later burnt to
the ground and was not rebuilt. Farmer's Union had a new elevator contracted
after that. In 1919 Campbell Farming Corporation took over Farmers' Elevator.
Thomas D. Campbell and his associates leased from the government thousands
of acres of Indian land in 1918 and embarked on raising wheat on a grand scale.
With modern machinery devised by Mr. Campbell and his engineers, the venture
was a marked success. Production costs were cut, wheat farming was reduced
to a scientific basis conducted on the same principles as manufacturing, and
yields raised to the maximum. The office, which still stands today, was housed in
a building taken from the old Fort Custer site.

'"

ACTIVITY:

If one tin square is approximately 29 inches high, how tall is the
elevator?

BECKER HOTEL

200 N. Center Avenue
The Becker Hotel is a three-story rectangular brick building that stands 34feet high. The hotel was built by Anton Becker in 1908 as the Montana Saloon
with family living quarters upstairs. The hotel had a main facade on Center
Avenue and a corner
entrance. The side
facade has five bays,
four entries, and several plate glass store
fronts. The windows
all have metal awnings. The diagonal
tower is pressed metal
simulating brick topped
by an ornate flagpole,
and a small baroque
dormer. It extends
over the entrance and
holds the sign "Hotel
Becker 1917".

ACTIVITY:
Notice the keystones
over the second story
windows. Notice the
design formed by the
lighter brick on the
building parapets. What evidence do you see that the overhang (dormer) above
the door is NOT made of brick? The north wall still contains what information?

SPENCER'S

GENERAL STORE -THOMPSON
TRUCKING
(ABANDONED)
corner of Railroad Street and Center Avenue

Spencer Store, a general store and post office, was the first building in
Hardin in 1907. E. C. Spencer built his first store on the south side of the track
but later built the present building on the north side. The store was a "work of art"
since the sides were made by putting building paper on the inside of the studding, red corrugated sheets on the outside, and sawdust in-between. Since the
floor was knotty fence boards, change dropped on the floor disappeared forever.
The sawdust store was replaced by a two-story concrete block store which also
contained a Chinese laundry in the back. The roof of the Spencer Store was
totally wrecked by a cyclone in 1909, and only the one-story structure was repaired. Later it was the hub for Thompson Trucking. The building housed a meat
1, market, a grocery store, and an ice cream plant
before serving as a gas station and
garage. The removal of some old
wood structures behind the building,
some of the oldest in Hardin, made
rway for the present brick
,- addition.

-

.t.

-.M

ACTIVITY: Observe the south side carefully. Describe what evidence you can
see that the building was repaired after the cyclone.

JAMES

REID POOL

HALL -BIG

HORN COUNTY

NEWS

204 N. Center Avenue
Anton Becker purchased this lot adjoining the Montana Saloon from J. P.
Arnold of Billings in 1910. He erected a one-story brick building which opened in
1911 when the Pioneer Pool Hall moved from the Hardin Hotel across the street.
Mutt Larkin, a popular Hardin barber, had his shop here. In 1918 James Reid
had a 40-foot addition put on the rear and installed a double lane bowling alley.
In 1926 an indoor golf
course, containing nine
rn ~
holes, started here.
;; I
"",.
Throughout the years the
building has housed
Goering Meat Market in
the rear and a Piggly
;'
Wiggly Grocery in the
front. Roy Greenfield's
mother, Mrs. Thompson,
opened the Pastime Cafe
.~.
'::.. -7~~
in 1943. When she died
_..,
-.;';~
':",,~
in 1944, Danny Jones ran
this cafe until his death in
1973. It was a popular
~
"
cafe and has fed many
people through the years. The building remained empty for over eleven years
when, in 1987, the Mainstreet Program began. It became the Chamber of Commerce Office and the first office of the Historic Preservation and CLG program for
Big Horn County. After extensive renovation the building sold to the Big Horn
County News for their paper office, and the previously established offices moved
into the vacant Becker Hotel to continue the Mainstreet Program. It is now the
offices of the Big Horn County News~
fL:JJ

Sketch the brick embellishments
(stud-like decoration) from theside.

:&
ACTIVITY:

PRUITT BUILDING -GREG PATTISON, C.P.A.
208 N. Center Avenue
This lot was purchased by Arthur Knudson from Wm. H~ Blyth in March,
1910. He immediately built this two-story building which was wired for electric
lights by J. E. Weston on May 15, 1910, being the first building wired in Big Horn
County. The second electric building was the C. D. Schneider Building next door
on the south which was wired on May 17, 1910. There was no electricity in
Hardin, yet, but they would be ready for the big day. This building has housed
~he Star Theater, a Gents Furnishing store and a general mercantile until 1920.
Knudson sold the block to Franz Karsten, who sold it to Wes Pruitt in 1915. It
has changed hands many times and now houses the office of Greg Pattison.

ACTIVITY:

On the second floor, notice the two different architectural styles of
windows. Draw each.

~

T. E. GAY BLOCK -4 ACES -BIG HORN INSURANCE -SWEETS 'N SUCH
10 W. 3rd Street -224 N. Center Avenue -8 W. 3rd Street
This second largest business block was built in 1916. Mr. Gay bought the
lots from Gwen Burla in 1910. Architects Link & Haire of Billings drew the plans.
The formal opening was celebrated with a grand ball in the south store room.
The building housed, among other businesses, Gay's Hardware. After the sale to
L. S. McAllister, it became known as Hardin Hardware until it went out of business in 1961. The upstairs of the building contained many professional businesses, lawyers, dentists, etc. Today this area is apartments. Downstairs now
houses insurance offices, a barber shop, the 4-Aces Lounge, a candy shop, and
a lease office.

~-

-~

~.

.-r-

~::-

ACTIVITY:
Notice the heavy chain
holding the awning.
Sketch the metal
brackets of the main
entryway on 3rd Street.

~

'

~
~

FIRST NATIONAL

BANK

-COAST

TO COAST

11 W. 3rd Street
This was the home of Hardin's first bank. The site was the second lot sold
on May 30, 1907. It was sold to John Arnold and E. A. Howell, business men
from Billings. The original building was enlarged in 1910 and contained various
businesses through the years. The bank was called First National Bank and
remained so until 1945 when it merged with the Big Horn County Bank. In 1945,
after the bank merger, the bank moved across the street into the Gay Building.
At that time Archie Grover moved a drug store from the Sullivan Building, where
he had been since 1938, becoming Big Horn Drug. When the Big Horn Drug
closed its doors in 1993 for the final time, the space was taken by the Coast to
Coast Store which is presently in operation.

ACTIVITY:

Count the glass squares that were in the original doorway.
What makes these glass squares different?
Where have you seen them before?

HARDIN MEAT MARKET -MAXWELL'S
306 N. Center Avenue

-THE SOURCE

This building was originally built and used by Gibson Bros. for a general
store. The first kiln of brick in the spring of 1909 was used by Mr. Tolliver to build
this store on the second lot north of the new bank building. It was later purchased
by the Kopriva Bros. and was called the Hardin Mercantile. During a remodeling
project the front of the store was planned as a meat market. The market would
be managed by M. L. McGrew, who had purchased the Ebeling Market and
changed the name to Hardin Meat Market. In 1921 McGrew sold the market to
John Swindle and by this time the market occupied the entire building. In 1950
Swindle sold to Dan and Joe Zeiler. It passed from the Zeilers to Ron Biery who
owned it until 1981. This was the last time it was used as a meat market. It has
contained several businesses since that time. Until
~:
.J'::._c,-- r
recently, Maxwell's Carpets conducted business in the
building and now it is occupied by The Source.
(

ACTIVITY:

Choose one brick design near the top of the buildings from the
Hardin Meat Market to the end of the block going north.
Copy that design here.

HARDIN FURNITURE EXCHANGE -LAMMERS
17 E. 4th Street
~

-

TRADING POST

tl:JJ

In 1917 B. J. Lammers bought the Thomas building, the site of Hardin's
first court term in 1913. The building was built in 1908 by Thomas and
MacRoberts. It had housed a mortuary, a theater, and a drug store. Mr.
Lammers remodeled the old building to house many of Hardin's early
businesses: Lammers Furniture Exchange, Burks Trucking, and
Fleming Shoe Shop. The second story contained twenty apartments and twenty lodging rooms. In 1919, Mr. Lammers tore
down the old brick building in the rear and replaced it with the
structure that is now Lammers Trading Post. In 1950 the old
Thomas building burnt down and the brick building was
remodeled to its present condition. This business is one
of the oldest still being conducted by members of the
original family.
--

ACTIVITY: Looking south from the vacant lot on
the corner of Center Avenue and 4th Street, where
Lammers used to stand, draw the building skyline
without looking at the picture above. Compare the
skylines; are they the same?

...

WATER WORKS or CITY HALL
101 E. 4th Street
The Hardin City Water Works was started in the fall of 1919 and completed in 1920. It was a brick and tile two-story building over underground settling basins. Engineer R. N. Murray of Billings and Security Bridge Co., who
..r
built -constructed
many bridges and numerous
water
and
sewer
C
the building.
The
inside
of projects,
the building was completed as needed. The
building housed the City
Hall and the fire department. The building
was stuccoed later.

~

As the rest of the block became available, the city bought it for
storage for city equipment. Aside from the stucco facades,
the Water Works has changed little.

ACTIVITY:

Notice the lampposts' globes.
Draw one of the lampposts.

JOHNSTON & TUPPER -MISSION INN (VACANT)
223 N. Center Avenue
This one-story building was built in 1909 by J. W. Johnston and Steve
Tupper. The- store- carried baled hay, grain, flour, and feed. In 1910 the building
was extended
to the alley
with a steel
ceiling that still
remains. In
1915 when a
gas pump was
placed in front
of the building,
the city council
issued an
order that all
hitching posts
be removed
from Center
Avenue. After
the partnership
dissolved, the
Mission Billiard Parlor and Cafe was started in the rear with a 3rd Avenue entrance. In 1929 the entire building was remodeled for use as the Mission Inn run
by the Buzzettes who bought it in 1938. It has had several owners since then but
has been known as the Mission Inn for over 55 years.
ACTIVITY:

Notice the hammered "steel" over the door. Notice the stucco overlay on the south side's original boards and lathe. Make a rubbing of
the s~-~cco.
tl:n

HARDIN STATE BANK -SAL'S LAST STAND WESTERN WEAR
219 N. Center Avenue
This one-story brick building was built in 1911 for the Hardin State Bank
with Percy Wilcox in charge of the construction. The frame building that stood on
this lot was purchased by the Hardin State Bank and moved to the adjoining
vacant lot to the south, and business was conducted here until the brick building
was completed. In June of 1917 Model Clothiers, owned by S. J. Marguisee and
his uncle Jacob, opened here. In about 1929 the building was enlarged and Sam
continued to run Model Clothiers until 1949. Keith Martin started Martin's Western Wear here and did business for the next 18 years moving to the next block in
1967. In the years since, it has housed several other businesses, a flower and
gift shop, a second-hand store, a plumbing supply store, the Jailhouse Art Gallery, and presently is the site of Sal's Last Stand Western Wear.

ACTIVITY:

This entrance and those on either side are recessed.
What would be the advantage?

SAVOY HOTEL AND CAFE -THE

PLAZA

217 N. Center Avenue
The Savoy Hotel and Cafe, the first three-story building in Hardin, was
built in 1917. W.A. Dedrick was the architect and J. W. Van Houten contracted
the carpentry. It was very modern at that time -a full basement with a steam
heating plant, electric lights throughout, and two bathrooms with hot and cold
water on each floor. The cafe itself, 'a family place because it sold no liquor, had
French beveled plate glass mirrors on the south wall and private dining rooms
and a barber shop on the north. It was completed two months ahead of Mr.
Beck's Becker Hotel. In 1945 Harvey Cort bought it. The Cort Hotel and Bar was
destroyed by fire in December of 1987.

ACTIVITY: In whose memory
is the plaza dedicated? Draw a
simple sculpture to place in the
plaza.
~

:::
..-:'":

HARDIN

DEPOT -BURLINGTON

NORTHERN RAILROAD
Railroad Street

DEPOT (VACANT)

On August 4, 1922, B. J. Jabst Building Co. was contracted to build the
cross-shaped one-story masonry building that is the present depot. In 1907
Hardin's first depot was brought from Fort Custer after being cut into small sections and moved on a train through the Big Horn Bridge. The design was similar
to Burlington Northern depots in Nebraska. Two years later it was expanded
twelve feet on the east and fifty feet on the west for freight room. The entire
building would be two stories with the living quarters upstairs. When the new
depot was contracted, part of it was moved and remodeled into a residence at
522 North Crook.

PflVlllOI1 rool

i
~.

;t-~..I

~

qable roo!

."
:-;;~_'-:;.i;::.~!!;

ACTIVITY:
The present depot has which type of roof?
How do you know?

I
hip rool

Prepared by
Paulette Frazer, Peggy Kimmet,

Kathy Stenerson

Printed by
District Printing
Hardin School Districts 17H & 1

Histories and photos provided by
Big Horn County Historic Preservation Office
Jackie Redding -H. P. officer

